Now that you're an expert in time as we're going to use this countdown timer to make a pretty fun egg
time app I'm going to show you in action here.
So it looks like this.
We've got our egg and we've got our slider at the top.
And with the slide out we can then control the time on the countdown timer.
Then we can tap go and it will start counting down.
You notice that the slider is disable that.
And then when we stop in the middle of the time it resets back to 30 seconds and re-enabled the slider.
And then let's just see what happens when it finishes.
So the last bit of Countdown.
And then we get
rather impressive airhole noise when it gets to zero.
So should be a lot of fun.
Just before I set you off if you don't want to go online and search for the images and sound that I've
used then I'll just show you where they are.
So I'm using clip at panda dot com slash categories slash chicken egg clip art and there's the egg image
that I used.
I just found that using a search on google images and the sound is an air horn sound which is sound
Bible dot com slash 1 540 dash dash horn to reach TNL or you can find any other sounds that you like
on sound Bible dot com.
All right.
So time now for you to give that a go.
Best of luck.
All right.
Hope you enjoyed that one.
I'm going to start Of course by creating a new project
called an egg timer and all the defaults that we're used to.
So I'm going to begin by downloading the sound and image.
So there's my egg it's going to click.
Download them and there it is.
Just to make sure it's in the same place.
I'm just going to export it to the desktop and call it egg.
There we go.
And then same with the iPhone.
I'm going to download it as an MP 3
and I'll call it a horn.
All right.
Now I've got everything that I need.
Back over to Android studio and let's import both of those
to our roll file folder.
Sorry
there it is.
And then I just right click the control clicked and reveal in find up
and then I'm going to drag
two new items right in there.
I get and they've been picked up.
Remember you can use synchronized roll if you need to if they know that lovely.
So let's get rid of hello world and start by bringing in our Salita or seek Bob
so I'll put it right at the top and change the width to fill parent excellent and then just double click
and change the ID to
time a Sipah.
All right now I'm going to bring in an image for you.
Where are we.
Image V.
Just underneath my time a and I'm going t fill parent
for both width and height and then I'm going to change the South-Sea
and click on the dots and find my results.
Then I realize that I've actually put it in the wrong place and of course it should get inside drawable.
So I'm just going to drag that over if I can.
It's not looking like it wants to do that so let's just open it up and find her again and then copy
it from rural and paste it into the horrible
way and then synchronize drawable.
There it is.
So now I've got my Hagg right that like
next I just need my text fee for my time.
So I'm going to drag that in.
And yet I want to pretty much Center it but down slightly from there I think
will play around a little bit with this till we get it right and then let's just change the text initially
to be
say we have zero minutes and 30 seconds will probably be a reasonable initial
time and then text size let's just experiment a little bit and we'll try something like 30 espie
Yep.
Little small for 50 maybe even bigger than that.
Seventy ISP
and I'm happy with the positioning of that as well.
You can of course play around with that more if you like.
But
most importantly let's change the ID to time to text a few.
And then finally we need our button.
So let's just drag that in.
Damn that lovely.
And initially that's going to say Go
and call it the controller button because it's not necessarily going to be a start button all the time.
It's going to change around depending on the context of the app.
All right let's start by setting up the code for our sick bar.
So I don't create method that's first of all find it so seek by
times seek Paul is equal to cast it as a seek by and then get it by finding view by ID is ID Dot time.
But
then we'll set the maximum and you can set this whatever you like really.
I think 10 minutes is probably reasonable for an egg timer.
So I'm going to set it as 10 minutes which in seconds is going to be 10 times 60 or 600
then I'm going to set the current progress which remember is 30 seconds.
So that should set us up for our initial set up.
Then initially all we want is for when the slide is dragged up and down for this label to update.
So let's set that up before we do a test run.
So we want time a bar and then set on Seek bar change listener and then we want a new seek part on Seek
bar change listener and lovely we get our default code for us as before we're not interested in on start
tracking touch on stock tracking touch.
We can do everything when the progress is changed.
So our first challenge is converting from seconds to minutes and seconds and that's reason straightforward.
We can create an integer called minutes which is going to be the number of seconds in total.
Divided by 60 and that of course is not necessarily going to be a whole number but if we cast it to
an integer like that then it will round down.
So what this will do is take the number of seconds divided by 60 and around down.
And that's exactly what we want with the number of minutes.
So that will give us the number of whole minutes.
Then we want the number of seconds kind of left over after those minutes.
So we'll get that from seconds and this time we want to take the total number of seconds and subtract
from that the number of minutes multiplied by 60.
So you might want to just post the video and look at that for a few moments if you're not quite sure
why that will work.
But just to clarify what we've done in the second line there we've taken the total number of seconds.
So that includes all the minutes and we've subtracted from that the number of seconds already included
in the minutes here.
And that gives us the number of seconds left over.
So this now gives us the number of minutes and the number of seconds in our progress here.
Then we just want to update the timer on the app which is here and you may remember our call that time
text view.
So let's first of all get it here.
So it's I text fee called timer text view we want to cast it to a text fee and get it using find view
by id dot ID time a text view.
There we go.
And now we just want to update it here.
It's a time of text FYI.
Set text
and we're going to use the colon in the middle and then we want to take our minutes and seconds and
convert them to a string.
So we'll do that using integer
dot to string minutes
plus the colon plus integer
8 to string seconds.
There we go.
So that was relatively straightforward.
I hope we can now slide all the way up to 600 seconds or 10 minutes and
that will then update the time a text view to show the correct number of minutes and seconds that the
user has selected Let's take a look.
I really like how appliques.
Now let's go look at them.
Fantastic.
All the way up to 10 minutes.
Now we've got a slight quirk that you can see that.
That of course if the number of minutes or seconds is zero then we only get a single digit there.
Whereas really you'd expect to see 0 0 because this is a timer.
Now I'm quite happy with that over here.
With the number of minutes but I'm not happy with that here with the number of seconds.
So I'm going to add a little bit of code.
So we've got two zeros there.
Even though there's only one in our calculation.
And as always there's a number of ways that we could do that but I'm going to create a string called
second string which initially I'm going to set to
the value of seconds but obviously converted to a string and then I'm just going to do a check to see
if second string is equal to zero.
And if it is we'll set second string to 0 0 or Ahmed of course will display second string here on the
label.
So just to check that you could of course have checked the integer stage.
Doesn't really matter.
Let's just make sure we should now find that our timer displays nicely then we get to zero.
Either way you can do that for minutes as well if you like but I actually quite like the single zero
there but it does make me think that I should change my initial value.
From 0 0 30 to just 0 30 otherwise it'll be out of whack with the rest of the time it's all right.
Now it's time to bring in our go button which remember we called control button.
Now I'm going to start by adding an on click.
I don't want to call this start time or anything like that because it's going to change.
So I'm just going to call it control time.
Like that
every time.
So now let's jump back here.
And create our control time method.
Do that with public
FOID actually just forgotten what I call it.
Control time
and that will be called by Ivey which will call if you that's opinion and I says every case for that.
Now I always do like to do a quick log
whenever I introduce the button just to make sure that it's working
before we write any of our complicated carried.
So let's take a look.
Button pressed
So initially what we want to do is start the timer so let's write our code to do that first.
So we'll create a new
count down timer.
Now we definitely want to count down every second.
But it's not obvious how many milliseconds we're going to want how are we going to get that.
Well we can get it from the CGC bar value because remember the CGC bar is the total number of seconds.
So if we're going to get it from the Secret Valley we need this equal value to be defined outside the
uncreate method.
So we can access it from anywhere.
So let's to find that that.
And then we don't want to define it twice.
There we go.
So now we can use
time a Seek get
progress.
And that of course is the number of seconds.
So we want to multiply that by a thousand to get the number of seconds
OK.
Now we can actually tap on Countdown time and then use the light bulb there to implement the methods
that we need.
So on tick and on finish and then that will put the code in that we typed out manually last time.
That's a handy shortcut.
So on each tick we need to update the value of the time.
So we've already got some code to do that and that's this code here.
Again I don't want to have code in my app twice unnecessarily so I'm going to cut that and put it into
a separate method that I can call twice so I just call it public FOID and then update timer.
And that's going to need an integer
which will be seconds left
and we get.
And then we'll Papau code in and of course now instead of progress we're going to be working with seconds
left.
And similarly here
and we need to access time a text.
So let's define it.
Outside of all of our methods.
So that should now update the timer whenever we call it.
So let's start by just popping it back in here.
Update timer and then we're going to parse it a number of seconds left which is just progress.
And then here
the
need is to update the timer again.
Now we get into an integer.
This is a long so we're going to cast it as an integer and we want millies until finished divided by
a thousand.
So that's the number of milliseconds.
Divide by a thousand to get the number of seconds and costs that to an integer to allow that value to
be placed into the update time code.
Now we've got a small issue up here that when I copied that code up it had the key word final in it
which we haven't actually talked about before.
Final is the way that we create a variable that cannot be changed.
So Andrew Studia actually put that in for me here.
When we created our text view because once we found a view by its ID we can't change that.
We can't change which view that refers to.
But here of course we haven't actually defined what the time a text view is.
So we shouldn't use the final key word there.
We just defined as a text view and then update it here.
OK.
Now I don't want to add too much code at once.
So rather than playing a sound
I'm just going to
log the time or is done when we're finished.
And then of course don't forget to actually start the countdown.
So now we should find that when we tap the button the count down counts down and then we get that message
in the logs when we're done.
So that's just me.
That's something simpler.
Oh that's interesting.
So we get we need to change that to 8 0 6 we'll do that in a minute but let's just check.
Excellent that's looking good.
Cere
So a couple of things to note.
Let's just check and make sure we have got time a done.
But notice that it didn't actually call on tick the very last time.
So that's going to look strange if we finish on 0 1.
So we got a few little fixes to make that
first of all we need to update the time a text few to zero when it's finished.
He's Liam
just like that.
And then we need to change it so that when it's 0 4 for example let's just say Yep.
So we definitely want that to be 0 4 not 4 Otherwise it looks like 40 seconds.
So we could put in an else here and change that too.
If
seconds is less than or equal to 9 if it's a single digit
then we want to add an extra zero in the front.
So it will make second string equal to zero.
Plus second string which will just put a zero in the front.
And in fact that's exactly what we want to do when second string is 0.
So we can actually get rid of that first if statement completely.
Now if the number of seconds is less than or equal to nine then we just add a 0 in front.
Either way.
OK so let's just run that again and see if those two fixes have indeed fixed the behavior that we wanted
them to.
So once again it's decreased so now that looks a lot better.
Great.
Go
to one and we do get 0 0 but you might have noticed a slight delay there.
Let's just see that again.
So if we go for three to one.
We then get a slightly longer second finishing off.
Now why is that happening.
You may notice as well that when we tap go it decreases almost straight away.
In fact it didn't decrease there jumped let's just check that again.
So it starts decreasing straight away.
So we really want to change that behavior so that it doesn't do that.
So let's firstly see what's causing that what's actually going on is when we start the count down timer
with say 10 seconds or ten thousand milliseconds to go.
This first on tick isn't actually called immediately.
It's called a few milliseconds after.
So let's say we're looking for 10 seconds then this is going to get called at just under ten thousand
milliseconds which means we're going to have say nine thousand eight hundred milliseconds divided by
a thousand which then rounds down because we're rounding to an integer to nine seconds.
So that's why we get the nine seconds straight away and then eight and then seven.
And that's why we also get the delay at the end.
So we have to do a slightly curious fix here and that is to add say one tenth of a second to our total
count down time at time and that will allow for the time it takes for the script to actually process
the first on take and then the delay will carry on and we'll get the output that we want and everything
will happen actually at the right time.
Even though it's happening a tenth of a second later as far as the app is concerned let's take a look
now.
So we'll take it down say eight seconds.
Now when we go we get a slight delay which makes sense.
So it feels better to start with and then we should get a smooth.
There you go.
Finish as well.
So yeah that's a slightly odd fix that we need to put in there to make everything look better.
We're still getting our time a done LOEG.
So everything's looking fine.
All right.
Next we'll change the log to an instruction to play the sound instead.
So we want to play this slightly horrendous air horn sound.
So if you remember the process we want media player I'll call it and play um and then we use media player
to create context is this.
And then we want our DOT roar dot horn
There we go.
And now we've got an interesting error here so I thought I'd leave this in if we click on that.
You can see we get an error of cannot resolve method to create anonymous Android to IRESSA can't be
on time.
Now that's quite strange but what's actually going on here is we normally use this in this context to
refer to the application context but because we're inside a countdown timer here this actually refers
to the countdown timer so we can't use this to refer to the application context which means we need
to refer to that manually which we do using get application context.
Context sorry.
There we go.
So yeah if you try and play a sound inside another countdown timeout or something like that then you'll
get that problem so you need to use the full get application context.
All right then it's just play a dot.
Start
OK.
So let's just check that make sure I've got my volume up and we should now find that when the time it
finishes we get lovely a whole noise.
Two one wonderful that's going to get you to get here.
Get your eggs sorted out William.
So we're pretty much that we just want to do a couple of things.
So first of all we want to change the go button to a stop button.
When the countdown is active and we also want to disable slide when the countdown is active because
we don't want the user to be able to change the countdown with the slider when it's active which has
been few things slightly.
OK.
So I think we're going to need
a boolean
counter is active and initially that's going to be false.
And then when they use the taps control time we're going to set Kansa is active too.
True.
And we also want to disable the seek Bahiya as well so we can do that using time a seek Paul taught
set enabled is false.
So that will set elevation set enabled so that will stop the user seeking back and forth while the counter
is active.
Now we only want that to happen if counter is active
is false when the timer is pressed.
So we want all of this to happen but only
if counter is active is false.
So this will then stop the time.
Set counter is active to be true and disable the seek.
There's one other thing that we want to happen when that button is initially pressed and that is we
want to update the text of the button to say stop rather than to say go.
So to do that we're going to need to refer to the button.
So let's create a button
in the widget code and remind myself what I called it.
So control the button.
Very sensible.
So we'll call it control the button here as well.
And then in the uncreate method
we'll establish
what that is.
So cast it as a button and then find view by id ador ID dot control button.
So now we can use control button to refer to that button and we'll do that here is a control button
and then set text to be stop
OK.
So let's just check that all that works.
Obviously we need to do something when County is active is equal to true as well.
So that will be our last
challenge.
Here we go.
So again we'll tap go.
So our time is looking good you can see our slide has been disabled.
Brilliant.
And our button has changed to stop.
If we tap that nothing happens because counter is active is equal to Fultz.
So what do we want to happen if counteractive is true.
What we want to reset the timer.
There it goes.
So I want to see first set the time a text.
Back to 30.
I want to set the time a Sikh Bob to have a progress of 30 seconds as before.
And lastly of course we want to stop the countdown timer.
We can do that at the moment because we haven't called our countdown time or anything so let's fix that.
All created here.
So count down timer we'll call it countdown timer.
And then here this is going to be our countdown timer.
And then once we've given it a name we can use countdown timer dot cancell.
One more thing that we're going to need is to update the button text back to go again.
So let's quickly do that control a button set text to go.
All right.
I think that's everything.
So let's take a look.
We should now have a fully functional take time app where we can start and stop the slash reset the
timer
as we like solutes First of all just check that they are adjusting still works.
Excellent.
And that looks nice.
Fantastic.
Let's bring it down to 21 seconds.
If we go and we get this countdown and that's disabled if we stop that gets reset that gets turned back
to go.
But I did forget something I forgot to re enable our SIKMA.
So let's quickly do that.
Set enabled.
Try that again.
Hey guys.
So countdown is working great.
If we stop it resets it back to 30.
We're back together again and seek by is enabled again and then we tap go again.
Now there's one more thing that we forgot or that I forgot I should say.
Can't really blame it on you.
And that is to set counter is active
back to Fultz again.
Otherwise clicking that button is just going to process these all over again.
All right.
Fingers crossed I've remembered everything this time.
So Guy stop excellent and go again wonderful.
Stopping resets it back to 30.
And then let's just make sure that our wonderful Horn is still functioning.
And actually it makes me think OK.
So now that's come back to 0 3 but it hasn't reset everything to the user now has to click stop to get
everything back which really isn't great.
There's a number of different ways you could solve that.
And please do be creative there.
But what I'm going to do is just run this reset mechanism when the countdown timer has finished.
So again rather than copy and paste the code I'm going to cut it and create a new method for it.
So public FOID reset timer.
We don't need any variables being passed to at this time.
So reset time.
So we want that to happen in two places.
One when the user manually resets and the other when the timer has finished.
So for hopefully the final time let's just check it that will have a slightly strange effect maybe of
resetting it back to 30 seconds but I think that'll be clear enough to the user because the sound will
have made it very clear that the timer did indeed finish.
So let's just make sure
wonderful.
So that looks fine.
The fact that it doesn't go down to zero and resets back to 30 I think does make sense.
But of course you can change your apps slightly differently if you like.
Great.
So I hope you enjoyed that one we now have a fully functional egg timer.
We haven't quite left timers behind yet though we're going to make a brain training app in a couple
of years time but we'll take a moment out from that to see how to hide and show user interface elements
to allow us to make our Brain Trainer.